Learn: Cascade Layer (#20755)
mdn/content: files/en-us/learn/css/building_blocks/cascade_layers/index.md

Often, as the complexity of the site increases, the number of stylesheets increases, which makes source order both more important and more complex. Cascade layers simplifies maintaining such code bases. Cascade layers are explicit specificity containers providing simpler and greater control over which CSS declarations end up being crossed out, enablind the developer to prioritize sections of CSS without having to fight specificity.

To fully understand cascade layers it is important to ensure you understand the CSS cascade:

## Review: Cascade

The C in CSS stands for "Cascading." It is the method by which styles cascade together. The user agent goes through several very clearly defined steps to determine which single value gets assigned for every property of every element. We will briefly list the steps, then dig deeper into step 4, cascade layers, which is what you came here to learn:

  1. **Relevance:** Find all the declaration blocks with a selector match for each element.
  2. **Importance:** Sort rules based on if they are normal or important. Important styles are those that have the [`!important`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/important) flag set.

>   3. **Origin:** Sort rules by author, user, or user-agent origin and by importance 

Author: ```suggestion
  3. **Origin:** Sort rules by author, user, or user-agent origin and by importance
```

>   4. **Layers:** Within each origin importance bucket, sort by cascade layer. The layer order for normal declarations is from first layer created to last, followed by unlayered normal styles. This order is inverted for important styles. 

Author: ```suggestion
  4. **Layers:** Within each origin importance bucket, sort by cascade layer. The layer order for normal declarations is from first layer created to last, followed by unlayered normal styles. This order is inverted for important styles.
```

  5. **Specificity:** For competing styles in the origin layer with precedence, sort declarations by [specificity](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity). <!-- When @scope is supported, uncomment: "6. Scope: If there is a specificity tie, compare element [`@scope`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@scope), if relevant and used." Supported in Chrome 105. Not yet documented -->
  6. **Proximity:** When two selectors in the origin layer with precendence have the same specificity, the property value from the last declared highest specificity selector wins.

> For each step, only the declarations "still in the running” move on to "compete” in the next step. If only one declaration is in the running, the following steps are moot.

Author: ```suggestion
For each step, only the declarations "still in the running” move on to "compete" in the next step. If only one declaration is in the running, the following steps are moot.
```

### Origin and cascade

> There are three [cascade origin types](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/cascade#origin_types): user-agent stylesheets, user stylesheets, and author stylesheets. The browser sorts each declaration by origin and importance into size origin buckets. There are eight levels of precedence: the six origin buckets, properties that are transitioning, and properties that are animating. The order of precedence goes from normal user-agent styles, which have the lowest precedence, to styles within currently applied animations, to important user-agent styles, and styles being transitioned, which have the highest precedence: 

Author: ```suggestion
There are three [cascade origin types](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Cascade#origin_types): user-agent stylesheets, user stylesheets, and author stylesheets. The browser sorts each declaration by origin and importance into size origin buckets. There are eight levels of precedence: the six origin buckets, properties that are transitioning, and properties that are animating. The order of precedence goes from normal user-agent styles, which have the lowest precedence, to styles within currently applied animations, to important user-agent styles, and styles being transitioned, which have the highest precedence:
```

1. user-agent normal styles
2. user normal styles
3. author normal styles
4. styles being animated
5. author important styles
6. user important styles
7. user-agent important styles
8. styles being transitioned

The "user-agent" is the browser. The "user" is the site visitor. The "author" is you, the developer. Styles declared directly on an element with the {{HTMLElement('style')}} element are author styles. Ignoring animating and transitioning styles for the moment, user-agent normal styles have the lowest precedence; user-agent important styles the greatest.

> For each property, the declaration that "wins” is the one from the origin with precedence based on the weight (normal or important). Ignoring layers for the moment, the value from the origin with greatest precedence gets applied. If the winning origin has more than one property declaration for an element, the [specificity](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity) of the selectors for those competing property values are compared. Specificity is never compared between selectors from different origins. This will be reiterated a few times as this fundamental concept really needs to be understood.

Author: ```suggestion
For each property, the declaration that "wins" is the one from the origin with precedence based on the weight (normal or important). Ignoring layers for the moment, the value from the origin with the greatest precedence gets applied. If the winning origin has more than one property declaration for an element, the [specificity](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity) of the selectors for those competing property values are compared. Specificity is never compared between selectors from different origins. This will be reiterated a few times as this fundamental concept really needs to be understood.
```

> In the below example, we have two links: The first has no author styles applied, so all user-agent styles are applied. The second has [`text-decoration`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/text-decoration) and [`color`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/color) set by author styles even though the selector in the author stylesheet has a specificity of `0-0-0`. The reason author styles "win" is because when there are conflicting styles from different origins (layers aren't in play yet), the rules from the origin with precedence are applied, no matter what the specificity is in the origin that doesn’t have precedence.  

Author: ```suggestion
In the below example, we have two links: The first has no author styles applied, so all user-agent styles are applied. The second has [`text-decoration`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/text-decoration) and [`color`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/color) set by author styles even though the selector in the author stylesheet has a specificity of `0-0-0`. The reason author styles "win" is because when there are conflicting styles from different origins (layers aren't in play yet), the rules from the origin with precedence are applied, no matter what the specificity is in the origin that doesn’t have precedence.  
```
```suggestion
In the below example, we have two links: The first has no author styles applied, so all user-agent styles are applied. The second has [`text-decoration`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/text-decoration) and [`color`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/color) set by author styles even though the selector in the author stylesheet has a specificity of `0-0-0`. The reason author styles "win" is because when there are conflicting styles from different origins (layers aren't in play yet), the rules from the origin with precedence are applied, no matter what the specificity is in the origin that doesn’t have precedence.  
```

{{EmbedGHLiveSample("css-examples/learn/layers/basic-cascade.html", '100%', 500)}}

At the time of this writing, the "competing" selector in the user-agent stylesheet is `a:any-link`, which has a specificity weight of `0-1-1`. While this is greater than the `0-0-0` selector in the author stylesheet, the two specificity weights are never compared. Learn more about [how specificity weight is calculated](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity#how_is_specificity_calculated).

Origin precedence always beats selector specificity. If an element property is styled with a normal style declaration in multiple stylesheet origins, the author style sheet will override the redundant normal properties declared in a user agent stylesheet. Every. Single. Time. If the style is important, the user agent stylesheet wins. Every. Single. Time.  Cascade origin precedence ensures there are no specificity conflicts between origins.

One last thing to note before moving on: order of appearance, or _proximity_ only becomes relevant when the competing declarations in the origin having precedence have the same specificity.

> We now understand "cascade origin precedence,” but what is "cascade layer precedence”? We will answer that question by addressing what cascade layers are, how they are ordered, and how styles are assigned to cascade layers. We'll cover regular layers, nested layers, and anonymous layers. Let's first discuss what cascade layers are and what issues they solve.

Author: ```suggestion
We now understand "cascade origin precedence," but what is "cascade layer precedence"? We will answer that question by addressing what cascade layers are, how they are ordered, and how styles are assigned to cascade layers. We'll cover regular layers, nested layers, and anonymous layers. Let's first discuss what cascade layers are and what issues they solve.
```

The `@layer` at rule creates a layer, named or not, or appends styles to a layer if the named layer has already been created. While we called the first anonymous layer `<anonymous(01)>` and the second `<anonymous(02)>`, this is just so we can explain it. These are unnamed layers. There is no way to reference them or add additional styles to them.

The first declaration of the block, where we set the `color: #333` on  `body`, was declared outside of any layer. All styles declared outside of a layer are joined together in an implicit layer.  Normal unlayered declarations take precedence over the normal layered declarations even if the unlayered styles have a lower specificity and come first in the order of appearance.

In the line `@layer theme, layout, utilities;`, in which we declared the series of layers, only the `theme` and `utilities` layers are created, as `layout` was created in our first line. Note that this line does not change the order of already created layers. There is currently no way to re-order layers once declared.

> We then declare our fifth layer, which is our second anonymous layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We then declared the fifth layer, which is the second anonymous layer.
```

> We now have a total of five layers, `layout, <anonymous(01)>, theme, utilities, <anonymous(02)>` – in that order - with a sixth, implicit layer of unlayered styles containing `body` and `main` color declarations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So that's how there's a total of five layers, : `layout`, `<anonymous(01)>`, `theme`, `utilities`, and `<anonymous(02)>` – in that order - with a sixth, implicit layer of unlayered styles containing `body` and `main` color declarations.
```

> If we add some CSS, reusing an existing layer name, the CSS gets appended to the already existing layer. It does not create a new layer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we add some CSS by reusing an existing layer name, the CSS gets appended to the already existing layer. It does not create a new layer.
```

In the following interactive example, we assign styles to two layers, creating them and naming them in the process. Because they already exist, being created when first used, declaring them on the last line does nothing.

{{EmbedGHLiveSample("css-examples/learn/layers/layer-order.html", '100%', 500)}}

> Try moving the last line, the `@layer site, page;` to make it the first line. What happens?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try moving the last line, `@layer site, page;`, to make it the first line. What happens?
```

#### @layer creation and media queries

If you define a layer using [media](​​/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Media_Queries/Using_media_queries) or [feature](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Conditional_Rules/Using_Feature_Queries) queries, and the media is not a match or the feature is not supported, the layer is not created. In the following example, we create the site `layer` only in wider browsers. We then assign styles to the `page` and `site` layers, in that order.

{{EmbedGHLiveSample("css-examples/learn/layers/media-order.html", '100%', 500)}}

If you are on a wide screen, the `site` layer was declared in the first line, meaning `site` has less precedence than `page`. Otherwise, `site` has precedence over `page` as it was declared later on narrow screens. Depending on your device size, changing the size of your browser may change the layer order. If that doesn't work, try changing the `50em` in the media-query to `10em` or `100em`.

### @import

> The [`@import`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@import) rule allows users to import style rules from other style sheets either directly into a CSS file or into a {{htmlelement('style')}}. Generally, when importing stylesheets, the `@import` must be before any CSS styles within the stylesheet or `<style>` block. An exception to the "@import must come first" rule are that `@import` may be preceded by an `@layer` rule that creates one or more layers without assigning any styles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`@import`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@import) rule allows users to import style rules from other style sheets either directly into a CSS file or into a {{htmlelement('style')}} element. Generally, when importing stylesheets, the `@import` statement must be defined before any CSS styles within the stylesheet or `<style>` block. An exception to the "@import must come first" rule is that `@import` may be preceded by an `@layer` at-rule that creates one or more layers without assigning any styles.
```

You can import a stylesheet into a named layer, a nested named layer, or an anonymous layer. The following layer imports the style sheets into a `components` layer, a nested `dialog` layer within the `components` layer, and an un-named layer, respectively:

```css
@import url("components-lib.css") layer(components);
@import url("dialog.css") layer(components.dialog);
@import url("marketing.css") layer();
```

> You can import more than one CSS file into a single layer. The following imports two separate files into a single `social` layer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can import more than one CSS file into a single layer. The following declaration imports two separate files into a single `social` layer:
```

```css
@import url(comments.css) layer(social);
@import url(sm-icons.css) layer(social);
```

You can import styles and create layers based on specific conditions using [media queries](​​/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Media_Queries/Using_media_queries) and [feature queries](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Conditional_Rules/Using_Feature_Queries). The following imports a style sheet into an `international` layer only if the browser supports `display: ruby`, and the file being imported is dependent on the width of the screen.

```css
@import url("ruby-narrow.css") layer(international) supports(display: ruby) and (width < 32rem);
@import url("ruby-wide.css") layer(international) supports(display: ruby) and (width >= 32rem);
```

> There is no equivalent, yet, for the {{HTMLElement('link')}} method of linking stylesheets. Creating a `layer` attribute is being considered, but, as of this writing (September 2022), there is no specification or support. For now, use `@import` to import a stylesheet into a layer when you can’t use `@layer` within the stylesheet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no equivalent of the {{HTMLElement('link')}} method of linking stylesheets. Use `@import` to import a stylesheet into a layer when you can’t use `@layer` within the stylesheet.
```
We need to avoid time-specific verbiage.

## Nested layers

> Do you have to worry if a 3rd party stylesheet you're importing into a new layer has layers? No. The layers become nested layers. Nested layers are layers within a named or anonymous layer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nested layers are layers within a named or anonymous layer. If you're importing a third party stylesheet that has layers into a new layer, you don't need to worry. The imported layers become nested layers. 
```

> Nested layers are created the same ways as described for regular layers above. They can be created using `@layer` followed by the names of one or more layers; the nested layer being a period-separated list of layer names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nested layers are created using the same methods as described for regular layers. They can be created using `@layer` followed by the names of one or more layers, the nested layer being a period-separated list of layer names.
```

> If you nest a `@layer` block at-rule inside `@layer` block at-rule, with or without a name, the nested block becomes a nested layer. Similarly, when a stylsheet is imported with an `@import` declaration containing the `layer` keyword or `layer()` function, the styles get assigned to that named or anonymous layer. If that import contains layers, those layers become nested layers within that anonymous or named layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you nest a `@layer` block at-rule inside another `@layer` block at-rule, with or without a name, the nested block becomes a nested layer. Similarly, when a stylsheet is imported with an `@import` declaration containing the `layer` keyword or `layer()` function, the styles get assigned to that named or anonymous layer. If that import contains layers, those layers become nested layers within that anonymous or named layer.
```

Digging a bit deeper into the example we included above:

```
@import url("components-lib.css") layer(components);
@import url("dialog.css") layer(components.dialog);
```

> In the first line we imported `components-lib.css` into the `components` layer. If that file included any layers, named or not, those layers are nested layers withing the components layer. Named layers can be added to via `components.layerName`. Unnamed layers can not be accessed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the first line, we imported `components-lib.css` into the `components` layer. If that file contains any layers, named or not, those layers become nested layers within the `components` layer. Named layers can be added via `components.layerName`. As mentioned before, unnamed layers cannot be accessed.
```

> The second line imports `dialog.css` into the `dialog` layer, which is a sub-layer of `components`. `dialog` gets created as the last layer within the `components` layer, unless `components-lib.css` already had a `dialog` layer. If `components-lib.css` had layers, all the layers become nested layers. If one of the layers was `dialog`, that layer is now accessible via `components.dialog`, and the styles from dialog.css are appended to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second line imports `dialog.css` into the `dialog` layer, which is a sub-layer of `components`. `dialog` gets created as the last layer within the `components` layer, unless `components-lib.css` already had a `dialog` layer. If `components-lib.css` had layers, all the layers become nested layers. If one of the layers was `dialog`, that layer is now accessible via `components.dialog`, and styles from `dialog.css` are appended to it.
```

Let's look at another example. If we imported `layers1.css` into a named layer with the following:

```css
@import url(layers1.css) layer(example);
```

> This would create a single layer named `example` containing some declarations and five nested layers --  `example.layout`, `example.<anonymous(01)>`, `example.theme`, `example.utilities`, and `example.<anonymous(02)>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This would create a single layer named `example` containing some declarations and five nested layers -  `example.layout`, `example.<anonymous(01)>`, `example.theme`, `example.utilities`, and `example.<anonymous(02)>`.
```

If we want to add to a named nested layer, we use dot-notation:

```css
@layer example.layout {
  main {
    width: 50vw;
  }
}
```

## Ordering layers and precedence order

> Layer order matters. A lot. In the same way the cascade sorts by origin and importance, the cascade sorts each CSS declaration by origin layer and importance as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Layer order matters. A lot. In the same way as the cascade sorts by origin and importance, the cascade sorts each CSS declaration by origin layer and importance.
```

```css
@import url(A.css) layer(firstLayer);
@import url(B.css) layer(secondLayer);
@import url(C.css);
```

> The layer order precedence is the order in which layers are created. If the author styles have two declared layers, (assuming there are no layers in C.css), the order of precedence is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The layer order precedence is the order in which layers are created. If the author styles have two declared layers, and assuming there are no layers in `C.css`, the order of precedence would be as follows:
```

1. firstLayer normal styles (A.css)
2. secondLayer normal styles (B.css)
3. unlayered normal styles (C.css)
4. inline normal styles 
5. animating styles
6. unlayered important styles (C.css)
7. secondLayer important styles (B.css)
8. firstLayer important styles (A.css)
9. inline important styles
10. transitioning styles

The order of layers is the order in which the layers each first appeared for normal styles, with unlayered styles coming last. For normal styles, later declared layers take precedence over earlier declared layers, with unlayered styles being in a final implicit unnamed layer. This order is inverted for important styles. Then inline styles, declared using the [`style` attribute](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/style) directly on an element, take precedence over layered and unlayered styles.

{{EmbedGHLiveSample("css-examples/learn/layers/layer-precedence.html", '100%', 500)}}

> In this example, there are two named layers, unlayered styles, an inline styles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, there are two named layers, unlayered styles and inline styles.
```

The inline-styles, added with the `style` attribute, sets a normal `color` and an important `background-color`. Normal inline styles override all layered and unlayered normal styles. Important inline styles override all layered and unlayered normal and important author styles. There is no way for author styles to override important inline styles.

The normal `text-decoration` and important `box-shadow` are not part of the `style` inline styles and can therefore be overridden. For normal non-inline styles, unlayered styles have precedence. For important styles, layer order matters! While normal unlayered styles override all normal styles set in a layer, with important styles, the precedence order is reversed; unlayered important styles have lower precedence than layered styles.

> The two styles declared only within layers are `font-style`, with normal importance, and `font-weight` with an `!important` flag. For normal styles, the B layer, declared last, overrides styles in the earlier declared layer A.  For normal styles, later layers have precedence over earlier layers. The order of precedence is reversed for important styles. For the important `font-weight` declarations, layer A, being declared first, has precedence over the last declared layer B.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The two styles declared only within layers are `font-style`, with normal importance, and `font-weight` with an `!important` flag. For normal styles, the B layer, declared last, overrides styles in the earlier declared layer A. For normal styles, later layers have precedence over earlier layers. The order of precedence is reversed for important styles. For the important `font-weight` declarations, layer A, being declared first, has precedence over the last declared layer B.
```

> You can reverse the layer order by changing the first line from `@layer A, B;`, to `@layer B, A;`. Try that. Which styles get changed by this, and which stay the same? Why?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can reverse the layer order by changing the first line from `@layer A, B;` to `@layer B, A;`. Try that. Which styles get changed by this, and which stay the same? Why?
```

  1. **Relevance:** Find all the declaration blocks with a selector match for each element.
  2. **Importance:** Sort rules based on if they are normal or important. Important styles are those that have the [`!important`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/important) flag set.
  3. **Origin:** Sort rules by author, user, or user-agent origin and by importance.
  4. **Layers:** Within each origin importance bucket, sort by cascade layer. The layer order for normal declarations is from first layer created to last, followed by unlayered normal styles. This order is inverted for important styles.
  5. **Specificity:** For competing styles in the origin layer with precedence, sort declarations by [specificity](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity).
  6. **Proximity:** When two selectors in the origin layer with precedence have the same specificity, the property value from the last declared, highest specificity selector wins.

> For each step, only the declarations "still in the running” move on to "compete" in the next step. If only one declaration is in the running, the following steps are moot.

Author: ```suggestion
For each step, only the declarations "still in the running" move on to "compete" in the next step. If only one declaration is in the running, the following steps are moot.
```

### Origin and cascade

There are three [cascade origin types](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Cascade#origin_types): user-agent stylesheets, user stylesheets, and author stylesheets. The browser sorts each declaration by origin and importance into six origin buckets. There are eight levels of precedence: the six origin buckets, properties that are transitioning, and properties that are animating. The order of precedence goes from normal user-agent styles, which have the lowest precedence, to styles within currently applied animations, to important user-agent styles, and styles being transitioned, which have the highest precedence:

1. user-agent normal styles
2. user normal styles
3. author normal styles
4. styles being animated
5. author important styles
6. user important styles
7. user-agent important styles
8. styles being transitioned

The "user-agent" is the browser. The "user" is the site visitor. The "author" is you, the developer. Styles declared directly on an element with the {{HTMLElement('style')}} element are author styles. Ignoring animating and transitioning styles for the moment, user-agent normal styles have the lowest precedence; user-agent important styles the highest.

> ### Origin and specificity

Author: ```suggestion

### Origin and specificity

```

For each property, the declaration that "wins" is the one from the origin with precedence based on the weight (normal or important). Ignoring layers for the moment, the value from the origin with the highest precedence gets applied. If the winning origin has more than one property declaration for an element, the [specificity](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity) of the selectors for those competing property values are compared. Specificity is never compared between selectors from different origins.

> ### Origin and specificity

Author: ```suggestion

### Origin and specificity

```

> In the example below, there are two links. The first has no author styles applied, so all user-agent styles are applied. The second has [`text-decoration`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/text-decoration) and [`color`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/color) set by author styles even though the selector in the author stylesheet has a specificity of [`0-0-0`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity#selector_weight_categories). The reason why author styles "win" is because when there are conflicting styles from different origins (layers aren't in play yet), the rules from the origin with precedence are applied, irrespective of the specificity in the origin that doesn’t have precedence.  

Author: ```suggestion
In the example below, there are two links. The first has no author styles applied, so all user-agent styles are applied. The second has [`text-decoration`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/text-decoration) and [`color`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/color) set by author styles even though the selector in the author stylesheet has a specificity of [`0-0-0`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity#selector_weight_categories). The reason why author styles "win" is because when there are conflicting styles from different origins (layers aren't in play yet), the rules from the origin with precedence are applied, irrespective of the specificity in the origin that doesn't have precedence.
```

For the rest of this tutorial, we will limit our discussion to author styles, but keep in mind that layers can also exist in user and user-agent stylesheets.

Large code bases can have styles coming from multiple teams, component libraries, frameworks, and third parties. No matter how many stylesheets are included, all these styles cascade together in a single origin: the _author_ style sheet.

Having styles from many sources cascade together, especially from teams that aren't working together, can create problems. Different teams may have different methodologies; one may have a best practice of reducing specificity, while another may have a standard of including an `id` in each selector.

> Specificity conflicts can escalate quickly. A web developer may create a "quick fix” by adding an `!important` flag. While this may feel like a easy solution, it often just moves the specificity war from normal to important declarations.

Author: ```suggestion
Specificity conflicts can escalate quickly. A web developer may create a "quick fix" by adding an `!important` flag. While this may feel like a easy solution, it often just moves the specificity war from normal to important declarations.
```

In the same way that cascade origins provide a balance of power between user and author styles, cascade layers provide a structured way to organize and balance concerns within a single origin, as if each layer in an origin were a sub-origin. A layer can be created for each team, component, and third party, with style precedence based on layer order.

Rules within a layer cascade together, without competing with style rules outside the layer. Cascade layers enable the prioritizing of entire stylesheets over other stylesheets, without having to worry about specificity between these sub-origins.

Layer precedence always beats selector specificity. Styles in layers with precedence "win" over layers with less precedence. The specificity of a selector in a losing layer is irrelevant. Specificity still matters for competing property values within a layer, but there are no specificity concerns between layers because only the highest-priority layer for each property is considered.

Cascade layers also allow the creation of nested layers. This serves two main purposes:

> - Within each layer, a team can create nested layers. For example, a component library can be added to a separate layer creating an additional origin and removing any need for competing specificity. Alternatively, the component team can include each component in a separate nested layer. The ability to nest layers is very useful for component library, framework, and third-party widget developers.

Author: ```suggestion
- Within each layer, a team can create nested layers. For example, a component library can be added to a separate layer creating an additional origin and removing any need for competing specificity. Alternatively, the component team can include each component in a separate nested layer. The ability to nest layers is very useful for component library, framework, and third-party widget developers.

```

```css
@import url("components-lib.css") layer(components);
@import url("dialog.css") layer(components.dialog);
@import url("marketing.css") layer();
```

You can import more than one CSS file into a single layer. The following declaration imports two separate files into a single `social` layer:

```css
@import url(comments.css) layer(social);
@import url(sm-icons.css) layer(social);
```

You can import styles and create layers based on specific conditions using [media queries](​​/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Media_Queries/Using_media_queries) and [feature queries](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Conditional_Rules/Using_Feature_Queries). The following imports a style sheet into an `international` layer only if the browser supports `display: ruby`, and the file being imported is dependent on the width of the screen.

```css
@import url("ruby-narrow.css") layer(international) supports(display: ruby) and (width < 32rem);
@import url("ruby-wide.css") layer(international) supports(display: ruby) and (width >= 32rem);
```

> There is no equivalent of the {{HTMLElement('link')}} method of linking stylesheets. Use `@import` to import a stylesheet into a layer when you can’t use `@layer` within the stylesheet.

Author: ```suggestion
There is no equivalent of the {{HTMLElement('link')}} method of linking stylesheets. Use `@import` to import a stylesheet into a layer when you can't use `@layer` within the stylesheet.
```

@import url(B.css) layer(secondLayer);
@import url(C.css);
```

The layer order precedence is the order in which layers are created. If the author styles have two declared layers, and assuming there are no layers in `C.css`, the order of precedence would be as follows:

1. firstLayer normal styles (A.css)
2. secondLayer normal styles (B.css)
3. unlayered normal styles (C.css)
4. inline normal styles 
5. animating styles
6. unlayered important styles (C.css)
7. secondLayer important styles (B.css)
8. firstLayer important styles (A.css)
9. inline important styles
10. transitioning styles

The order of layers is the order in which the layers each first appeared for normal styles, with unlayered styles coming last. For normal styles, later declared layers take precedence over earlier declared layers, with unlayered styles being in a final implicit unnamed layer. This order is inverted for important styles. Then inline styles, declared using the [`style` attribute](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/style) directly on an element, take precedence over layered and unlayered styles.

{{EmbedGHLiveSample("css-examples/learn/layers/layer-precedence.html", '100%', 500)}}

> In this example, there are two named layers, unlayered styles and inline styles.

Author: ```suggestion
In this example, there are two named layers, unlayered styles, and inline styles.
```

> 
> —[Cascading and Inheritance specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-cascade-5/#layering).

##  Creating layers

Layers can be created using any one of the following methods:

- Declaring layers using `@layer` followed by the names of one or more layers. This creates named layers without assigning any styles to them.
- Using an @layer block at-rule, with or without a name, which assigns style rules into that layer.
- Including the `layer` keyword or `layer()` function in an [`@import`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@import) at-rule. This assigns the contents of the imported file into that layer.

All three methods create a layer if a layer with that name has not already been initialized. If no layer name is provided in the `@layer` at-rule or `@import` with `layer()`, a new anonymous (unnamed) layer is created.

> **Note:** The order of precedence of layers is the order in which they are created. Styles not in a layer, or "unlayered styles", cascade together into a final implicit label.

Let’s cover the three ways of creating a layer in a little more detail before discussing nested layers.

> ### @layer with layer names

Author: I changed all three h3s

Let's look at another example. If we imported [`layers1.css`](#anonymous-and-named-layer-block-at-rule-assignment) into a named layer with the following:

```css
@import url(layers1.css) layer(example);
```

This would create a single layer named `example` containing some declarations and five nested layers -  `example.layout`, `example.<anonymous(01)>`, `example.theme`, `example.utilities`, and `example.<anonymous(02)>`.

If we want to add to a named nested layer, we use dot-notation:

```css
@layer example.layout {
  main {
    width: 50vw;
  }
}
```

## Ordering layers and precedence order

Layer order matters. A lot. In the same way as the cascade sorts by origin and importance, the cascade sorts each CSS declaration by origin layer and importance.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Precedence order of regular cascade layers
```
adding this here so that the next h3 heading "Precedence order of nested layers" is not a lone h3

You can reverse the layer order by changing the first line from `@layer A, B;` to `@layer B, A;`. Try that. Which styles get changed by this, and which stay the same? Why?

The order of layers is set by the order in which the layers appear in your CSS. In our first line, we declared layers without assigning any styles using `@layer` followed by the names of our layers, ending with a semi-colon. Had we omitted this line, the results would have been the same. Why? We assigned styles rules in named @layer blocks in the order A then B. The two layers were created in that first line. Had they not been, these rule blocks would have created them, in that order.

We included that first line for two reasons: first, so you could easily edit the line and switch the order, and second, because often times you'll find declaring the order layer up front to be the best practice for your layer order management.

> 

Reviewer: there were a lot of key rules that were highlighted here. Can we summarize them in a list in one place, something like:
- Important inline styles override all layered and unlayered normal and important author styles. There is no way for author styles to override important inline styles.
- For normal non-inline styles, unlayered styles have precedence.
and so on..

Author: Look for "To summarize:" to see the summary list (that section is new)

Reviewer: Thanks for adding this!

> ### Precedence order of nested layers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Precedence order of nested cascade layers
```

> The cascade precedence order for nested layers is similar to regular layers, but contained within the layer. The precendence order is based on order of nested layer creation. Non-nested styles in the layer have precedence over nested normal styles, with the precedence order reversed for important styles. Specificity weight between nested layers does not matter, though it does matter for conflicting styles within a nested layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cascade precedence order for nested layers is similar to that of regular layers, but contained within the layer. The precedence order is based on the order of nested layer creation. Non-nested styles in a layer have precedence over nested normal styles, with the precedence order reversed for important styles. Specificity weight between nested layers does not matter, though it does matter for conflicting styles within a nested layer.
```

> The following creates and adds styles to the `components` layer and `components.narrow` nested layer, and creates and appends styles to a new `components.wide` layer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following creates and adds styles to the `components` layer and `components.narrow` nested layer and creates and appends styles to a new `components.wide` layer:
```

```css
@import url("components-lib.css") layer(components);
@import url("narrowtheme.css") layer(components.narrow);

@layer components {
  :root {
    --theme: red;
    font-family: serif !important;
  }
}
@layer components.narrow {
  :root {
    --theme: blue;
    font-family: sans-serif !important;
  }
}
@layer components.wide {
  :root {
    --theme: purple;
    font-family: cursive !important;
  }
}
```

> Because unlayered normal styles have precedence over layered normal styles, and, within a layer, non-nested styles have precedence over normal nested styles, `red` wins. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because unlayered normal styles have precedence over layered normal styles, and within a layer, non-nested styles have precedence over normal nested styles, `red` wins over the other `theme` colors. 
```

> With important styles, layered styles take precendence over unlayered styles, with important styles in earlier declared layers having precedence over later declared layers. The order of nested layer creation is `components.narrow` then `components.wide`, so important styles in `components.narrow` have precendence over important styles in `components.wide`, meaning `sans-serif` wins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With important styles, layered styles take precedence over unlayered styles, with important styles in earlier declared layers having precedence over later declared layers. In this example, the order of nested layer creation is `components.narrow`, then `components.wide`, so important styles in `components.narrow` have precedence over important styles in `components.wide`, meaning `sans-serif` wins.
```

Let's look at another example, where we import [`layers1.css`](#anonymous-and-named-layer-block-at-rule-assignment) into a named layer using the following statement:

```css
@import url(layers1.css) layer(example);
```

This will create a single layer named `example` containing some declarations and five nested layers -  `example.layout`, `example.<anonymous(01)>`, `example.theme`, `example.utilities`, and `example.<anonymous(02)>`.

To add styles to a named nested layer, use the dot notation:

```css
@layer example.layout {
  main {
    width: 50vw;
  }
}
```

## Determining the precedence based on the order of layers

The order of layers determines their order of precedence. Therefore, the order of layers is very important. In the same way as the cascade sorts by origin and importance, the cascade sorts each CSS declaration by origin layer and importance.

> ### Precedence order of regular cascade layers

Author: ```suggestion

### Precedence order of regular cascade layers

```

In the same way that cascade origins provides a balance of power between user, user-agents, and author styles, cascade layers provide a structured way to organize and balance concerns within a single origin, as if each layer in an origin were a sub-origin. A layer can be created for each team, component, and third party, with style precedence based on layer order.

Rules within a layer cascade together, without competing with style rules outside the layer. Cascade layers enable the prioritizing of entire stylesheets over other stylesheets, without having to worry about specificity between these sub-origins.

Layer precedence always beats selector specificity. Styles in layers with precedence "win" over layers with less precedence. The specificity of a selector in a losing layer is irrelevant. Specificity still matters for competing property values within a layer, but there are no specificity concerns between layers because only the highest-priority layer for each property is considered.

> #### Issues nested cascade layers can solve

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Issues nested cascade layers can solve
```

Let's look at another example, where we import [`layers1.css`](#anonymous-and-named-layer-block-at-rule-assignment) into a named layer using the following statement:

```css
@import url(layers1.css) layer(example);
```

This will create a single layer named `example` containing some declarations and five nested layers -  `example.layout`, `example.<anonymous(01)>`, `example.theme`, `example.utilities`, and `example.<anonymous(02)>`.

To add styles to a named nested layer, use the dot notation:

```css
@layer example.layout {
  main {
    width: 50vw;
  }
}
```

## Determining the precedence based on the order of layers

The order of layers determines their order of precedence. Therefore, the order of layers is very important. In the same way as the cascade sorts by origin and importance, the cascade sorts each CSS declaration by origin layer and importance.

### Precedence order of regular cascade layers

> ### Precedence order of regular cascade layers

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
duplicate heading

You can reverse the layer order by changing the first line from `@layer A, B;` to `@layer B, A;`. Try that. Which styles get changed by this, and which stay the same? Why?

The order of layers is set by the order in which the layers appear in your CSS. In our first line, we declared layers without assigning any styles using `@layer` followed by the names of our layers, ending with a semi-colon. Had we omitted this line, the results would have been the same. Why? We assigned styles rules in named @layer blocks in the order A then B. The two layers were created in that first line. Had they not been, these rule blocks would have created them, in that order.

We included that first line for two reasons: first, so you could easily edit the line and switch the order, and second, because often times you'll find declaring the order layer up front to be the best practice for your layer order management.

To summarize:

> - The order of layers is the order in which the layers are created.
> - Once created, there is no way to change the layer order.
> - Layer precedence or normal styles is the order in which the layers were created.
> - Unlayered normal styles have precedence over normal layered styles.
> - Layer precedence or important styles is reversed, with earlier created layers having precedence.
> - All layered important styles have precedence over unlayered important (and normal) styles.
> - Normal inline styles take precedence over all normal styles, layered and not.
> - Important inline styles take precedence over all other styles, with the exception of styles being transitioned.
> - There is no way for author styles to override important inline styles (other than transitioning them, which is temporary).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The order of layers is the order in which the layers are created.
- Once created, there is no way to change the layer order.
- Layer precedence or normal styles is the order in which the layers are created.
- Unlayered normal styles have precedence over normal layered styles.
- Layer precedence or important styles is reversed, with earlier created layers having precedence.
- All layered important styles have precedence over unlayered important (and normal) styles.
- Normal inline styles take precedence over all normal styles, layered or not.
- Important inline styles take precedence over all other styles, with the exception of styles being transitioned.
- There is no way for author styles to override important inline styles (other than transitioning them, which is temporary).
```
